# IPython
Documentation found [here](https://ipython.readthedocs.io/en/stable/index.html).

IPython is an interactive python shell

## Features
IPython has the following features that might be useful:
- history, because who has time to type the same stuff all the time
- output logging
- syntax highlighting
- multi-line editing
- command-line editor
- access to system commands
- persisting python variables across sessions
- input/output caching
- auto-parenthesis
- timing execution of statements

## Input/Output Caching

### Input
Past inputs to the ipython shell can be recalled by pressing the up key or by making use of the
input caching system. `_i`, `_ii`, and `_iii` store the last three previous inputs, respectively.
`_i<n>` refers to the input number `n`, as shown on the ipython line prompt.
This lets you use previous inputs and manipulate them in python as strings.


`%history` will print a range of these `_i` variables.
`%history -g <grep string>` will allow for grepping through history.

`%rerun _i` will rerun the previous input commands.

`%recall_i` will edit previous input commands.

### Output
A similar system exists for output cache.
`_`, `__`, and `___` correspond the last three previous outputs.
`_<n>` refers to the output number `n`, as shown on the output prompt.

### Memory Demands
This caching system can increase memory demands, since the outputs are not automatically garbage
collected.

`InteractiveShell.cache_size` can be configured to limit the size of the cache.
Setting this to 0 means disabling caching.

`%reset` and `%del` can be used to clear out objects from memory.

## Automatic Parentheses
Callable objects can be invoked without parentheses:
```python
foo(1, 2, 3)
foo 1, 2, 3
```
<sub>This requires enabling via %autocall</sub>


## Pasting code from Python or IPython
IPython is smart enough to recognize interactive output from python or ipython shells.
You can copy and paste from a previous interactive session and it'll just work™.

## Suppressing Output
If an input is terminated with a semi-colon, this will suppress output and keep the output out of
output cache.
This useful when you want to run a command but don't care about the output.

## Editing
The magic `%edit` will allow for editing with an external editor.
This creates a temporary file and pastes the output when the editor is closed.
You can re-edit existing lines by passing the input cache line number.

## ptpython
[ptpython](https://github.com/jonathanslenders/ptpython#ipython-support) is a wrapper on top of
ipython that adds readline autocomplete (suggestions).
Auto suggesting completions is great as it addresses discoverability, one of common weaknesses of
terminal tools.

## Magic Commands
Magic | Description
---
`%edit` | Calls the EDITOR to edit multi-line inputs.
`%quickref` | Displays a cheatsheet
`%time` | Captures execution timings, like the unix `time` command.
`%timeit` | More powerful than `%time`, it uses the `timeit` python module
`%whos` | Prints all interactive variables and their values

# IPython Configs
An IPython config file can be created at `~/.ipython/profile_default/ipython_config.py`.
This file is ran before ipython startup and can be used to set default config settings,
automatically execute ipython lines such as importing libraries or default test data.

An example can be found in the [docs](https://ipython.readthedocs.io/en/stable/config/intro.html#example-config-file).
