---
title: umask Fun Times With WSL
categories:
  - programming
tags:
  - unix
---
Recently, I noticed that the `ls` colour output of my directories was strange.
`ls` uses use different colours and formatting to denote file attributes:
* Symlinks
* Sticky bit
* Directories vs. files
* Executables
This is set with the `LS_COLORS` environment variable.

What I noticed was that every directory was executable.
Meaning that *other* has permission to 'execute' on the directory, which is unusual for home dir subdirectories.
My initial guess was that I botched a `chown` command at some point in time.
Or a malicious script I ran did so.

I sanity checked this by running `mkdir` to create a new directory and noticed the permissions were already set by
default.
This is a big clue!
This means it's related to umask.

# What is `umask`
`umask` is a bit mask that's applied to turn off permissions.
I don't know why it's a bit mask, instead of simply default permissions.
I bet it has to do with historical reasons. AKA a half-complete hack that ended up sticking.

Octal permissions of 777 means read, write, and execute for owner, group, and all others.
Applying a bit mask will reduce permissions.
The common setting on many Linux distros is 022, which removes write permissions from group and others.

# Bug in WSL
There's a [bug in WSL implementation](https://github.com/Microsoft/WSL/issues/352) that doesn't call `/bin/login`, which
is how `umask` is set.

It's a bit disappointing that this bug has existed for 2 years.
Windows has enough hurdles as it is, with respect to using it as a unix-like development environment.

There's a fix in the ticket somewhere.
Something that involves changing the default user to root and running `/bin/login` or something.
But I really don't feel in spending time for a band-aid solution to a band-aid.
Maybe one day, it'll be magically fixed upstream.

# Fix
`umask` is only set for the current shell.
Changing the value of `umask` won't change the behaviour of processes.

Shell-specific settings can be set in `config.fish`.
But in this particular case, we want to apply this fix for all users.
I added this snippet to `/etc/fish/config.fish`:
```sh
if not string match '??22' (umask)
   umask 0022
end
```
