---
title: Queso
categories:
- cooking
tags:
- recipe
- tex mex
- appetizers
- chips
---

I made queso blanco dip, which was as an appetizer dish that I discovered Tex-Mex cuisine in Dallas.

## What is Queso Dip

It's essentially nacho cheese sauce dip.
The thing that really stood out to me was how simple the dish was but how effective it can be.

It is very similar in composition to mac and cheese sauce, which is a bechamel cheese sauce.
This means the techniques and learnings from the [SeriousEats Foodlab article][1] are all applicable.

[1]: https://www.seriouseats.com/recipes/2017/01/3-ingredient-stovetop-mac-and-cheese-recipe.html

* Use of evaporated milk, which contains proteins that help in emulsion.
* American cheese, which inherently has sodium citrate and gives the cheese its smooth and creamy melting texture.

## How to Eat

Queso is eaten with tortilla chips.
Because tortilla chips are salted and the cheese (which makes up a significant portion of the ingredients), there's very
little salt required.

The sauce is very rich, creamy, and heavy.
It would be best paired with some salsa or pico de gallo.
Or onion, cilantro, and lime juice.
It's a very refreshing contrast.

Queso should be served warm.
The sauce will thicken as it cools and it will not dip well.
Serve in a thick, warm ceramic pot.

## Review of Recipe

I found the flavour to be really good.
I used fresh roasted jalapeños and the flavour was great.
I want to try canned chilies and see if they're as good.

The sauce is on the thicker side.
I want to add 30 ml of chicken stock to thin out the sauce.
Or use fresh tomatoes, with juice, or vinegar.

---

{% assign recipe = site.recipes | where: "title",  "Queso Blanco Dip" | first %}
{% include recipe.html page=recipe %}
