---
title: Banh Bo
categories:
- cooking
tags:
- recipe
- baking
- steaming
---

[Bánh bò][1] are sweet steamed rice cakes.
Their signature aspect is the honeycomb structure, which is the result of air bubbles produced by yeast.

[1]: https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/B%C3%A1nh_b%C3%B2

## Name

The name translates to "cow cakes" or "crawling cakes".

The name *cow cakes* is referenced in a 1895 dictionary and the etymology is that the honeycomb pattern resembles
a cow's udder.

However, folk etymology refers to the act of the batter crawling up the sides.

## Regional Variations

### Vietnamese

The Vietnamese version of the cake uses coconut milk and Pandan flavourings.
The cakes are steamed.
Because they are steamed and high moisture, they stale and dry out quite quickly.
They should be reheated in the microwave to soften.
It's also best to keep these in the fridge as the high water activity makes it hospitable to bacterial growth.

Another version is the baked version, bánh bò nướng.
This is a similar batter, albeit with less hydration.
Then it's baked in hot oven, giving a brown crust.

### Chinese

These white cakes are found in Chinese bakeries.
They do not contain any dairy and are a simple batter of rice flour and sugar.
The fermented rice flavour is more prominent in this version.

### Indian

Idli are a South Indian rice cake that is used in savoury applications.
Rice and lentils are ground and a better is made.
This is left to ferment, which thickens and lightens the batter.
Then it is steamed.

## Cooking Tips

This is a fermented rice batter and requires sugars to feed the yeast.
Warm environments will help to increase yeast activity while minimizing the fermentation flavours.

When steaming, be sure to preheat the container.
This will assist in getting oven spring.

---

{% assign recipe = site.recipes | where: "title",  "Banh Bo" | first %}
{% include recipe.html page=recipe %}
