---
title: Tamales
categories:
- cooking
tags:
- recipes
- mexican
---

I love tamales.
There's something about that is reminiscent of Vietnamese dishes, wrapped in banana leaves.
The surface texture is slimy due to steamed starch against a water-proof wrapper.
The inner texture is soft, sticky, and chewy.
The smell is fragrant of wrapper and lacks Maillard browning.

I was pleasantly surprised to learn that tamales are very easy to make.
The assembly and cooking was not hard at all.
In my opinion, the difficulty of this dish is the filling and flavouring of the masa.

I supposed another skill is maximizing the filling to masa ratio, without it bursting.
But this true of any stuffed food item.

## Banana leaf vs. corn husks

In the U.S., it's more common to see tamales wrapped in corn husks.
Banana leaves see use in the more southern regions of Mexico and other Latin American countries.
The choice of wrappers is one of practicality: use the one that's readily available and on the cheap.
Corn husks and banana leaves are unused byproducts of corn and banana production.

That said, they do impart flavours onto the dough via contact during cooking.
I'm very familiar with banana leaf flavour but I wonder if corn husk provides desirable flavours.

Also, banana leaves are less porous and will create a water barrier.
You'll want to consider this and perhaps compensate with a dryer masa dough, lest you end up with soggy product.

## Fillings

I think the beauty of tamales is that is a generic platform for many fillings.
I used [Pork Ragu][1] leftovers and that worked incredibly well.

[1]: {% link _recipes/pork-ragu.md %}

Probably a good rule of thumb is that you should want to eat the filling on plain mashed potato or boiled dry pasta.
i.e. it should be saucy and bold in flavours and textures.

---

{% assign recipe = site.recipes | where: "title",  "Tamales" | first %}
{% include recipe.html page=recipe %}
