---
title: Annatto
categories: cooking
tags:
  - food science
  - culture
---

[Annatto][wiki] is a seed of a tree that is native to the tropical regions of Latin America.
It's used as a food dye and a spice.

[wiki]: https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Annatto#Traditional_cuisine

## Cheese

Annatto is very common in cheesemaking.
Orange cheeses, such as Cheddar, Velveeta, and American, are universally dyed with annatto.

It turns out these cheeses are not naturally orange!
Historically, cheddar cheese had hints of orange due to the carotene in the milk.
The colour of milk would vary based on the cow's diet throughout the season and region.
By the 1700s, it soon became a signal of cheese quality and cheesemaking started spiking their milk with annatto.

Besides manufacturers targeting consumer perception, this allowed them to keep the colour consistent.
They could use more or less dye as needed.
Ironically, in the modern world, this is no longer needed as production of milk is kept consistent, through
factory farming and consistent feed quality.
This means that modern cheeses do not need the dyes to keep the colour consistent.

However, tradition has completely taken hold at this point.
Consumers buy more orange cheese than not, simply because they think that's the normal state.
So white american cheese or white cheddar is probably the base cheese product and "more natural"!

## Other Foods

Annatto is used in Mexican cuisine for _cochinita pibil_, a braised pork dish.
This gives the oil a bright orange hue.

In Vietnamese cooking, it's what gives colour to _bun bo hue_ and _bun rieu_, dishes known for the rich vibrant colour.

## As Food Dye

Annatto is a considered a [natural food dye][wiki-food-dye] by the FDA.
This allows manufacturers to mark this as a _natural_ ingredient, as opposed to _artificial_.

[wiki-food-dye]: https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Food_coloring#Natural_food_dyes

Other ingredients used for colouring include:

| Ingredient | Colour   |
| ---------- | -------- |
| caramel    | brown    |
| cochineal  | deep red |
| elderberry | purple   |
| lycopene   | orange   |
| paprika    | red      |
| tumeric    | yellow   |
